---
title: Read a Large CSV/TSV File and Write into Parquet/Feather by Arrow
date: 2023-03-20
output:
  md_document:
    variant: gfm
    preserve_yaml: TRUE
knit: (function(inputFile, encoding) {
  rmarkdown::render(inputFile, 
                    encoding = encoding, 
                    output_file=paste0(Sys.Date(), "-", sub(".Rmd", ".md",inputFile)), 
                    output_dir = "../_posts") })
layout: post
category: [programming, website]
tags: [arrow, Rmd, R]
always_allow_html: true
related_posts: false
---

# 1. Setup Rmd for blogs

In my last post, I mentioned that I used a newer template for my
personal website. One thing I didn’t do was to bring my old posts into
my new website. One of the posts was actually about me building a
package to compile R Markdown file in Atom editor to plain HTML file for
blog posts. As it turns out, this is no longer needed and there is an
easier way to do this.

I stole/adapted the YAML header from [Ethan
Roubenoff](http://www.eroubenoff.net/2021-03-10-rmarkdown_jekyll/)’s
blog, which was “stole/adapted” (original wording of Ethan) from [Steven
Miller](http://svmiller.com/blog/2019/08/two-helpful-rmarkdown-jekyll-tips/)’s
post. This will allow us to write in Rmd and then compile into the
corresponding post folder for display on website.

Some tweaks were needed in my case including adding the `category` and
`tags` fields and the output folder. Here is the YAML for this blog
post.

``` yaml
---
title: Transform a Large CSV/TSV File into Arrow
author: Fangzhou Xie
date: 2023-03-20
output:
  md_document:
    variant: gfm
    preserve_yaml: TRUE
knit: (function(inputFile, encoding) {
  rmarkdown::render(inputFile, 
                    encoding = encoding, 
                    output_file=paste0(Sys.Date(), "-", sub(".Rmd", ".md",inputFile)), 
                    output_dir = "../_posts") })
layout: post
category: [programming, website]
tags: [arrow, Rmd, R]
always_allow_html: true
related_posts: false
---
```

# 2. My failed attempt to follow the Arrow tutorials

But what I really wanted to say was my recent discovery of R package
[`arrow`](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/arrow/index.html).
This will allow us to work with very large dataset (those even larger
than RAM) efficiently. A wonderful introduction of why `parquet` format
is more suitable in those situations can be found in [R for Data
Science](https://r4ds.hadley.nz/arrow.html#sec-parquet).

However, if we follow the steps in the [Section
23.4.3](https://r4ds.hadley.nz/arrow.html#rewriting-the-seattle-library-data),
we will encounter the following code block:

``` r
seattle_csv |>
  group_by(CheckoutYear) |>
  write_dataset(path = pq_path, format = "parquet")
```

where the `seattle_csv` object was defined earlier in [Section
23.3](https://r4ds.hadley.nz/arrow.html#opening-a-dataset) as:

``` r
seattle_csv <- open_dataset(
  sources = "data/seattle-library-checkouts.csv", 
  format = "csv"
)
```

If we combine those two blocks we have the following:

``` r
seattle_csv <- open_dataset(
  sources = "data/seattle-library-checkouts.csv", 
  format = "csv"
)

seattle_csv |>
  group_by(CheckoutYear) |>
  write_dataset(path = pq_path, format = "parquet")
```

This seems pretty straightforward, right? The first block read the data
in CSV and the second block write the data into `parquet` format.

I felt very confident, and tried to used those two blocks of codes to
read and write an extremely large TSV file I have (\>40 GB) into
`parquet` format. However, I tried it multiple times and it always ended
up occupying all of my RAM (64 GB) and froze my desktop.

``` r
my_big_tsv <- open_dataset(sources = "big.tsv", format = "tsv")

my_big_tsv %>% 
  group_by(year) %>% 
  write_dataset(path = "big-parquet")
```

I was exactly following the recipe but why didn’t it work?

# 3. My solution to deal with large CSV/TSV files

I then did some online surfing to figure out why this is the case. The
official [Apache Arrow documentation for
R](https://arrow.apache.org/cookbook/r/reading-and-writing-data---multiple-files.html#discussion-5)
clears states: “There are two different ways to specify variables to use
for partitioning - either via the `partitioning` variable as above, or
by using `dplyr::group_by()` on your data - the group variables will
form the partitions.”

This wording seems to suggest that both ways are equivalent to each
other. Either we group before writing or we specify the group in the
argument when writing the dataset. But I am stuck with the
`dplyr::group_by()` route and why not try the other way?

``` r
my_big_tsv <- open_dataset(sources = "big.tsv", format = "tsv")

my_big_tsv %>% 
  write_dataset(path = "big-parquet", partitioning = c("year"))
```

And this time the machine only took a litter CPU and RAM to produce
parquet files.

It seems reasonable now. The `open_dataset` will not read the actual
data into memory unless it was requested. The `group_by` actually
requests the data to be loaded for the grouping, before writing into the
`parquet` format.

However, without the explicit `dplyr::group_by`, the grouping was
carried out by arrow directly in the `partitioning` argument. Hence
there is no need to read the entire dataset into memory for grouping.

Therefore, the two different approaches are not equivalent to each
other. The `group_by` method will suffocate the machine when dealing
with larger-than-RAM files, whereas the `partitioning` method will not.
In my case, the file was smaller than RAM, but the `group_by` operation
clearly needs memory several times of the original file, so that the
entire operation becomes a larger-than-RAM situation.

The whole point of using Arrow was to avoid loading the whole dataset
into memory, but if we really need to `group_by` before writing into the
`parquet` and if this process actually suffocates the memory, why should
we do it this way? I think this difference should be at least mentioned
somewhere by someone, but I haven’t found anyone doing so. Hence I
documented my struggle in the hope of helping someone in the future.

<!-- I still think the `R4DS` and the `Apache Arrow documentation` are wonderful  -->
<!-- resources, but their descriptions on "how to read large CSV file and write into parquet"  -->
<!-- were a bit misleading. -->
<!-- I did find other blog posts and websites basically teaching the same way of -->
<!-- "group_by" and then "write_dataset", -->
<!-- but I haven't found anyone pointing out the differences between -->
<!-- those approaches. -->
